Octopus Cloud Architecture (#1150)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2024-09/octopus-cloud-architecture/index.md

Reviewer: Suggest replacing the link to the docs to the link to start a free trial in the first paragraph

Author: 👍

Reviewer: We might want to explain what a reef is first, before mentioning that we have one of them in each region

Author: I didn't find a nice way to define the reef fist without breaking the overall flow but manage to get the definition closer to when reef is mentioned for the first time.

Reviewer: Suggest linking to our DR docs page (https://octopus.com/docs/octopus-cloud/disaster-recovery) here: Side note. 

> The fact that each Cloud instance has its own database and a file share, also allows us to use built-in Azure tools for managing backup and restore processes.

Author: 👍

---
title: Octopus Cloud architecture
description: Learn how cell-based architecture helped us make Octopus Cloud reliable and scalable.
author: pawel.pabich@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2024-09-02-1400
metaImage: 
bannerImage: 
bannerImageAlt: 125 characters max, describes image to people unable to see it.
isFeatured: false
tags: 
  - Engineering
  - Octopus Cloud
  - Azure
---

> Octopus Cloud reliably runs thousands of Octopus Server instances. In this post, I explain the architecture that underpins this complex distributed system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Octopus Cloud reliably hosts thousands of Octopus Deploy customers. In this post, I explain the architecture that underpins this complex distributed system.
```

Idea: Prefer starting with the outcome, and hint at "complex distributed system" -- leave new concepts and implementation details (e.g. "Octopus Server") to later.

Provisioning a dedicated file share and a database for each Cloud instance also helps with the gradual rollout of the Octopus Server changes. This is because each instance can get upgraded and downgraded independently. That wouldn't be an easy goal to achieve if, for example, more than one Cloud instance shared the same database via database schemas or a similar mechanism that implements multi-tenancy.

### Scalable by default

Scalability is again where cell-based architecture shines. We can scale the infrastructure of Octopus Cloud easily by adding new reefs. We can also assign individual resource limits to each Cloud instance.

Fun fact: We had an event a few years ago when Octopus Cloud doubled the number of active Cloud instances in 48–72 hours, and nothing broke. No existing customers were affected and Octopus simply paid a higher hosting bill that month. 

### Avoiding temporal coupling

> Octopus Cloud must be able to perform its primary function, which is keeping Cloud instances up and running, even when some non-essential services aren’t available. For example, Cloud instances should continue to operate when any of the following are not available:

Reviewer 3: Octopus Cloud may be an overloaded term here, leaking internal nomenclature. Internally, we refer to Octopus Cloud as the hosting system for Octopus Deploy Cloud instances (at least that's my perception). From a marketing perspective, customers have the choice of Octopus Server, our on-premise offering or Octopus Cloud, our SaaS offering (again, my perception).

Do we need to be explicit that the monitoring, management and observability platforms referred below are internal platforms for our own internal operational use, not customer facing systems?

Author: Well spotted. Technically speaking, Cloud Platform is a part of Octopus Cloud. I didn't distinguish between them in the blog post on purpose.  My experience is that this distinction can create quite a bit of confusion initially and requires a the knowledge of our internal systems to be explained properly.  That's easy to do internally, but it will require quite a bit more effort for general public.

Reviewer 3: I was thinking an early statement could disambiguate, without having to go into too much detail. For example

`We designed Octopus Cloud as a distributed system that can withstand partial infrastructure outages. To achieve this high-level goal, we created a set of guiding principles. The engineering team at Octopus has been following these principles since the product's inception`

could be rewritten as 

`Our Octopus Cloud customers require a highly-available, always-on system. In order to achieve this we needed to design an infrastructure that could wishstand partial outages. To achieve this high-level goal, we [created/designed] an internal hosting [platform/environment/infrastructure] with a set of guiding principles. The engineering team at Octopus has been following these principles since the product's inception.`

You could then refer to the Octopus Cloud infrastructure, Octopus Cloud platform, or Octopus Cloud hosting environment further in the article when referring to the technology (or simply infrastructure, platform or hosting) and refer to Octopus Cloud when referring to the product.

Having said that... the term 'Octopus Cloud' appears at least 25 times in the article so adding additional clarifying statements may prove overwhelming to the audience. I'll leave it to your judgement.

Author: Thanks. That clarifies your point well.

Yes, it's the `XXX` in `Octopus Cloud XXX`  that would need to be added everywhere that I'm not sure about. As you noted, it might add quite a bit of noise.  I will sleep on it and see how I feel about it on Monday.  

Right now, my thinking is that all models are wrong, and the current level of simplification might be ok.

Author: I changed the post locally and replaced `Octopus Cloud ` with `Octopus Cloud XXX`, and needing to repeat 3 similar words regularly was tiring. Then I thought about removing `Octopus` and just using `Cloud XXX`, which is what we use internally, but that became a meaningless term without the internal context.  I think I will leave it the way it is. Thanks!

Author: @TeganAli, I think we are done with reviews from H&E group and SecOps. The post is in your hands now.

- Octopus Cloud management platform 
- Octopus Cloud observability platform 

In the context of [CAP theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem), Octopus Cloud opts for availability over consistency at the infrastructure level, and consistency over availability at the individual Cloud instance level.

### Using officially supported APIs only

Octopus Cloud glues together several third party services using their APIs. This might sound like an obvious choice. That said, we also extended this approach to interactions with internal services and Octopus Server itself. For example, if Octopus Cloud needs to provide a configuration value to a Cloud instance for a configuration setting that isn't exposed via a public API, then we add a new API. We won't modify this setting directly in the database even though we could.

Fun fact: After years of using APIs from major service and Cloud providers, we've learned that very few of them follow [SemVer](https://semver.org/). Also, changes to runtime characteristics (for example, a synchronous operation becomes asynchronous and vice versa) happen all the time and without any notice.

## Developer productivity

> Cell-based architecture can also increase engineering productivity, which is often overlooked. You can test each change on its own isolated reef, either locally or using an automated build. There's no need for shared test or dev environments, which are a common for testing infrastructure-related changes in our industry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cell-based architecture can also increase engineering productivity, which is often overlooked. You can test each change on its own isolated reef, either locally or using an automated build. There's no need for shared test or dev environments, which are commonly used for testing infrastructure-related changes in our industry.
```

## Trade-offs 

### Effort

> Cell-based architecture requires a considerable effort to implement properly. It's not something that an existing system can easily evolve into. In software engineering, we often distinguish between exactly 1 and 1+ problems. This is because the effort to implement a solution that handles multiples of X can be an order of magnitude bigger than a solution that handles just one of X. Call-based architecture falls squarely into the 1+ bucket. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cell-based architecture requires a considerable effort to implement properly. It's not something that an existing system can easily evolve into. In software engineering, we often distinguish between exactly 1 and 1+ problems. This is because the effort to implement a solution that handles multiples of X can be an order of magnitude bigger than a solution that handles just one of X. Cell-based architecture falls squarely into the 1+ bucket. 
```

---
title: The architecture of Octopus Cloud
description: Learn how cell-based architecture helped us make Octopus Cloud reliable and scalable.
author: pawel.pabich@octopus.com
visibility: public

> published: 2024-09-02-1400

Author: There is no specific deadline. I just thought it would be good to wrap it up in 2 weeks. If the process takes more that then let's just change the date.

metaImage: 
bannerImage: 
bannerImageAlt: 125 characters max, describes image to people unable to see it.

> isFeatured: false

Author: Not sure whether this should be true or false

Reviewer 4: False is correct. This changes which 3 posts get added to the Featured section on the blog landing page. But your post will feature at the top when it's the latest anyway.
